#latinamericanism

### _Counterfeit Politics_.

> **Derrida goes on to emphasize what he calls a “modern crypto-**  
> **politology” or a “political cryptology” that would counter this notion of**  
> **politics as absolute appearance and transparency:** “By refusing any right  
> to secrecy, the political agency, most often in the figure of state sovereign-  
> ty or even of reason of state, summons everyone to behave first of all and  
> in every regard as a responsible citizen before the law of the polis (...)”2° My argument  
> therefore follows Derrida’s “political cryptology” by emphasizing “the  
> right to secrecy,” not “beyond the order of the political,” as Derrida  
> seems to suggest, but rather against a certain tradition in political theo-  
> ry.*? I argue against the notion of politics as full appearance; instead, **1**  
> **emphasize the way conspiracy theory teaches us that politics must al-**  
> **ways take place as “disappearance,” but only if this “disappearance” or**  
> **“invisibility” is moving toward a notion of non-phenomenality, a _resis-_**  
> **_tance_ to coming to light**.
> 
> 13

Pareciera que la potencia del colombismo ha sido precisamente su resistencia a salir a la luz, a pesar de ser un producto de la ilustración (aunque habría que hacer una lectura de la ilustración americana como Lezama y otres la hicieron del barroco... aunque lo que parece sugerir Lezama es que en AL la ilustración vino empacada en el barroco). Paradójicamente, la narrativa modernista, que parece más definida por el principio de resistencia (como oposición a ataque), se obsesiona por traer a la luz lo que en el colombismo funcionaba como secreto, o mejor dicho, por hacer una especie de inversión de valores, y plantear como aspectos positivos, o reivindicativos, lo que en el colombismo era fuente de terror y de amenaza -ese telurismo que Martí idealiza es el terror que justamente moviliza la dimensión internacionalista, expansiva e invasiva de la conjura colombiana.

> Con-  
> spiracy theories therefore bear witness to what DeLillo call**s the “shatter-**  
> **ing randomness” of events through the narration of a catachresis, that is,**  
> **by naming something that has no proper name**. Precisely because con-  
> spiracy theories only contingently name the event, they cannot fully cov-  
> er over the gap that constitutes the event in the first place. In fact, politics  
> depends on this contingent act of naming. **After all, if the event could be**  
> **conclusively named and narrated, then there would be no need for politi-**  
> **cal discussion: the event could be put to rest and forgotten.** For that  
> reason, **a political narrative must contain a gap that is continuously**  
> **named and renamed, one catachresis after another, without ever filling**  
> **up the gap in a finalized way. If a narrative is to remain political, it must**  
> **therefore have the “defective” form of a conspiracy theory.** |
> 
> 10

> **politics only takes place when the**  
> **story of a community (a “we”) is invaded by the story of an enemy (a**  
> **“they”) that threatens the future of politics**. In other words, the **“invasion**  
> **narrative”** that is so common in conspiracy theories is not simply an  
> element of the fantastic that has been wrongfully grafted onto political  
> narratives. On the contrary, I argue that **all political narratives necessarily**  
> **contain this moment of invasion, that is, the moment when the polis is**  
> **truly threatened by a shadowy figuration that seems to come from the**  
> **outside**. I go on to suggest that even consensus politics rests on the very  
> threat to its possibility; without a complot that threatens the stability of  
> politics, even “the usual methods of political give-and-take” (in Hofstad- _  
> ter’s words) would not be possible. After all, **there could be no political**  
> **negotiation in the first place if the antagonistic other were not threatening**
> 
> 11

Lo primero que pienso de esto es cómo se invierten los roles. Digamos, desde Miranda hasta Rodríguez, la narrativa del alter-americanismo es la de una invasión positiva que se opone a una invasión negativa (la invasión española, que se combate con una invasión militar, primero; la invasión de "comercios, colonias y cultos", que se combate con una invasión demográfica, después); a partir de Martí, el alter-americanismo es meramente defensivo, se define por oposición al americanismo del norte. Digamos que la estructura conspirativa se desbalancea.


> I also agree that conspiracy theories tend to pro-  
> duce fantasies of the other as a threatening force, and that this figuration  
> ends up creating an antagonistic relation between a “we” and a “they.”
> 
> 12

I like this perspective of fantasies of the other as a product generated by conspiracy theories, and not as part of the conspiracy theories themself


# [@castro-gomezCriticaRazonLatinoamericana1996]

Durante el siglo XIX y hasta comienzos del  
XX, la identidad se produce mediante tecnologías educativas como la disciplina de la  
escuela, los rituales cívicos y las colecciones de los museos, que crean discursivamente  
una serie de acontecimientos fundacionales (las batallas de independencia, el martirio  
de los próceres, la firma de la Constitución, etc.). La cultura “propia” se define en  
relación con un territorio y se organiza discursivamente con base en textos, objetos y  
rituales ahistóricos, que representan la “raíz” de la nacionalidad.

59


# [@beasley-murrayIntroductionNewLatin2002]

**The tropes of**  
**solidarity and prosopopeic speaking ‘for’ the oppressed** that defined Latin  
Americanism’s oppositional possibilities (and that reached both their height and  
their nadir during the Central American revolutions) no longer seem to work, or  
to work in the same ways, when it seems at best a truism that VISA (and Coke,  
and Microsoft) are indeed ‘everywhere you want to be’, and thus when there are  
few or no territorially defined sites of resistance. If one version of the old Latin  
Americanism defined the continent as a ‘barbarie’ that had to be civilized, and  
another version saw it as a space of difference seeking autonomy by confronting  
(neo)imperialism, Néstor Garcı́a Canclini’s essay shows that the new Latin  
Americanism must reckon with the fact that these former differences and  
distinctions no longer hold, or at least not in any clear-cut manner.

262


# [@moreirasLineaSombraNo2006]

> Quizás la descolonización, en la medida en que se hace infinita en su demanda radical de reapropiación de un legado perdido, en la medida por lo tanto en que es un pensar del legado más que un pensar de la des-legación, no sea realmente descolonización sino más bien una curiosa forma de recolonización apotropaica, que sólo descolonializa para mejor recolonializar, siguiendo el espíritu de los tiempos.
> 
> 37
> 
> De hecho la descolonización masiva, apoyada siempre en una ideología de desarrollo nacional postcolonial, era ya una respuesta política a las reivindicaciones radicales del proletariado sostenidas por los partidos marxistas de masa. Se creía que el desarrollo nacional podría finalizar la explotación en cuanto tal, o minimizarla hasta hacerla políticamente viable. La des- colonización, en su forma radical o infinita, sin embar- go, iba más allá de presupuestos desarrollistas y asumía la posibilidad de un rescate del legado precolonial en la deslegación misma.
> 
> 36
> 
> Si el sujeto nacio- nal-popular fue lo que Louis Althusser pudo llamar un ejemplo de conciencia melodramática (“conciencia falsa de una situación real”), el sujeto civilizacional es a for- tiori conciencia melodramática y encubrimiento de si- tuaciones reales 13 .
> 
> 71


###### Grandin, G. “Your Americanism and Mine: Americanism and Anti-Americanism in the Americas”. _The American Historical Review_, vol. 111, no 4, octubre de 2006, pp. 1042–66. _DOI.org (Crossref)_, doi:[10.1086/ahr.111.4.1042](https://doi.org/10.1086/ahr.111.4.1042).


Such enthusiasm waned fast throughout the nineteenth century, overcome by Wash-  
ington’s militarism and Wall Street’s increasing dominance of Latin American econ-  
omies. Nationalists began to develop a vision of “two Americas,” a “Latin” America  
that for them was more faithful to the original vision of New World sovereignty and  
democracy than that advanced by the United States.

1043


Every new con-  
firmation of Anglo aggression—the Texas secession, the Mexican-American War,  
Walker’s invasion of Nicaragua, the Spanish-American War, the annexation of  
Puerto Rico and the Philippines, the 1902 creation of Panama, the Platt Amendment,  
Roosevelt’s Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, brief occupations of Mexico and  
Cuba followed by longer stays in Haiti, Nicaragua, and the Dominican Republic—  
provoked a new Latin American reprimand. 32

###### Thurner, Mark, et al. _The First Wave of Decolonization_. Routledge, 2019. _onesearch.library.nd.edu_, [http://proxy.library.nd.edu/login?url=https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ndlib-ebooks/detail.action?docID=5775146](http://proxy.library.nd.edu/login?url=https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ndlib-ebooks/detail.action?docID=5775146).

 post-1848 weaponization of nationalisms
 ix
 
 
 
 ###### Beckman, Ericka. _Capital Fictions: The Literature of Latin America’s Export Age_. University of Minnesota Press, 2013. /z-wcorg/.

> This shift in focus \[from politics to economics\] is justified by the fact that the political independence of new nations was accompanied from the start by a condition of non-independence in the sphere of global market relations. From the mid-nineteenth-century onward, letrados did double duty as presidents and novelists, and as diplomats and historians; they were also customs agents, Treasury ministers, and architects of liberal trade policies.
> 
> xix

> One of the paradoxical outcomes of this shift away from state institutions and toward market-driven specialization was the birth of an aesthetic discourse that defined itself in resistance to the economic sphere. This development, associated with the genesis of the cultural current known as Spanish American modernismo, sacralized art as a disinterested counterpart to the economic interests at the core of bourgeois liberalism. This vision of art, in turn, was inscribed as a founding principle of Latin American literary studies in the early twentieth century, through critics such as Pedro Henríquez Ureña, Alfonso Reyes, and Ricardo Rojas. As I argue throughout this book, however, the more literary production proclaimed its independence from the economic sphere, the more it revealed itself to be embedded within that very sphere.
    xxiii

Y por supuesto que establecer esta tensión es fundamental, porque esa forma de ser "anticapitalista" del modernismo es estructualmente distinta a la forma del sincolombismo. Así se sostendría con mucha más fuerza la idea de latinoamericanismo como enfermedad senil del sincolombismo.

> While “Spanish” or even “Hispanic” America would perhaps be a more accurate term, my point of departure is an economic model that became dominant throughout the region as a whole. My use of the marker “Latin America”—a term that rose to prominence precisely during the Export Age—aims to conjure this broad sweep of history, without losing sight of the particularities and variations within it.
> 
> xviii