---
title: 2. Historical perspective 
---
# Historical context

1810 is the great turning point in America in the face of what Erik @hobsbawmAgeRevolutionEurope1996 called, for European history, The Age of Revolution. Between April 19 in Caracas and November 10 in Potosí, uprisings and autonomous proclamations against Spanish imperialism occur in all the American viceroyalties on the mainland. The largest colonies in the hemisphere and in the world in terms of extension began a decade and a half long race for independence, which followed the already closed processes in Haiti and the United States. The secession  that began in 1810, accompanied by the publication of _El Colombiano_, was the anti-colonial and revolutionary struggle of the greatest territorial extension experienced by mankind up to that moment.  However, both in the history of revolutions proposed by Hobsbawm and in the history of decolonial thought, it occupies a minor and imprecise place. Characterized by @sheppardForeword2019 and @thurnerIntroduction2019 as The First Wave of Decolonization, the period in which my research is inscribed is attended to in a secondary and superficial manner, in a history of revolutions that manifestly claims to be centered in Europe.  Much more significant is the scant treatment given to it by decolonial criticism. As @sheppardForeword2019 notes: "[f]ollowing Walter Mignolo, decolonial theorists have denigrated earlier [to the 20th Century] anticolonial victories as state-centric elite affairs, that ensconced the values and politics of the former colonizers rather than challenged them" (viii).

In the literature review and conceptual discussion of decolonization, I will dwell on the analysis of the critical consequences of decolonial theory's rejection of nineteenth-century American anticolonial thought. For now I am interested in pointing out that I intend to transfer to cultural criticism the historiographical perspective that Sheppard proposes in _The First Wave of Decolonization_: one that proposes an approach to nineteenth-century decolonization that neither teleologically presupposes the failure of the project, nor exhausts itself in diagnosing its causes, but rather examines it according to what appeared temporarily as possible (xix-x). In my case, I am interested in analyzing from this perspective the postulation of a transnational project of Creole insertion in the world-system, which in most cases was not conceived as external, much less inferior to the West, but was repeatedly affirmed as its overcoming continuity. It is well known the punch line of @bolivarDoctrinaLibertador2010 of his invitation to the Congress of Panama: "Qué será entonces del istmo de Corinto comparado con el de Panamá?" (211). 

The publishing projects that I analyze in my research go through a period in which the "Creole pioneers" gave institutional and imaginary form to a view of the place of Hispanic America in the world that temporarily put in crisis what Carlos @jaureguiCanibaliaCanibalismoCalibanismo2008 calls "occidentalismo periférico" (32, 220, 229, 232, 344, 384). This exoticizing view of the American social and cultural process has a long colonial heritage, which continues in modernist Latin Americanism, and assumes the insertion of Luso-Hispanic America into modernity based on a notion of exteriority and exception. And although there are traits in Colombianism that eventually seem to reaffirm this notion of exteriority and exceptionality with respect to modernity, a detailed examination of its editorial projects reveals that the imagined community of Colombia was not conceived or operated in its broad outlines on the margin of modernity or the West, but rather in the vanguard of its foundation.

The dissolution of the real Colombia[^1] in 1830, and the death of Simón Bolívar the same year, seem to mark the definitive limit to this avant-garde stage of emancipation thought. However, the work of Simón Rodríguez, the most radical of Colombianism, was published for the most part after this date. His revolutionary program, which is concentrated in the editorial project _Sociedades americanas en 1828_ presupposes the imagined community of continental Colombia as its space of execution, and is published between 1828 and 1842. Thus, instead of 1830, I propose 1848 as the definitive limit to the Colombianist imagination, inasmuch as Mexico's loss of 55 percent of its territory to the United States [@simonIdeologyCreoleRevolution2017, 187] irreversibly destroyed two of the premises that sustained colombismo, from Miranda to Rodríguez. 

On the one hand, the spatial and bordering notion of the group of Luso-Hispanic-American nations[^4] that since 1810 defined the extension of the potentially confederable territory in a post-national entity was annulled. On the other hand, the Colombianist concept of the United States as "eventual and very selfish allies" [Quoted by @acostasaignesBolivarAccionUtopia2009, 384], whose originality could be imitated, according to Rodriguez, by the Creole vanguard[^2], expired. The invasion of Mexico opens the doors to the modernist idea of the United States as a monster on the prowl, radically differentiated from Luso-Hispanic America, which gives shape to contemporary Latin Americanism. It is that which is expressed, for the first time, in the poem by José María Torres Caicedo, "Las dos Américas", published in 1857 in _El Correo de Ultramar_.

In addition to the milestones of 1810 and 1848, which inaugurate and close the conditions of possibility of the Colombian project, there are two events of the period that I consider especially relevant to my project -and whose relation to each of the printed objects I will detail in my chapter descriptions. The first is the popular rebellion and social war that occurred in Venezuela between 1812 and 1815, derived from the events unleashed by the Creole rebellion of 1810. This event was a point of no return for the Creole pioneers, in that it meant a mass flight of the white Creole and royalist elite from the country, and a drift of the war of independence as a civil war, deeply marked by racial and social elements. As Juan Bosch has pointed out in _Bolivar y la guerra social_ , Bolivar's cosmopolitics -whose imprint marked, from its first issue, the editorial project of the _El Correo del Orinoco_ - was largely a strategy to give military leadership to a social movement that the new states could not contain. 

The second event that interests me is the London Stock Exchange crisis of 1825. As Richard @rosaSeisGradosAndres2006 has pointed out, part of the literate culture of the period was heavily involved in speculative processes affirmed on the promise of the Colombian project. And the collapse of that promise was the main cause of the financial crisis of that year, which finally led to the first sovereign debt default of the South American republics. As we shall see in the summary of chapter 4, the editorial projects of Rodriguez and Bello gave shape to two transnational attempts to overcome that crisis: one aimed at subverting the international division of labor and the center-periphery hierarchy that was beginning to be imposed, and the other aimed at perfecting and consolidating it.

In _Capital Fictions_, Erika @beckmanCapitalFictionsLiterature2013c looks at the role of Creole cultural production in the last quarter of the nineteenth century for the insertion of Latin American countries as exporters of raw materials and importers of manufactures in the "emerging world order" of economic liberalization and modernization-what the author characterizes as "The Export Age" (ix-x). The printed objects I explore in my project give form to transnational fictions that precede that era and yet are inscribed in a conception of geopolitics and culture that are only conceivable within the notions of the world market and literature that characterize capitalism[^7]. 

These printed works belong to the interregnum between the fall of the colonial regimes established in the long sixteenth century, and the establishment of Latin Americanist nationalisms that took hold over societies exporting nature[^8] in the second half of the nineteenth century. In that sense, the examination of these pre-export-era transnational fictions both challenges and ratifies @beckmanCapitalFictionsLiterature2013's idea that the Latin American "first liberal experiment" occurred in the second half of the 19th century  (xxiii) . It challenges it because Colombianism was a liberal project of economic and political insertion in the world-system, prior to the Export Age,, and with full awareness and willingness to play a leading role in the formation of the emerging world order. And it ratifies it insofar as Colombianism, strictly speaking, is not Latin American, for as @beckmanCapitalFictionsLiterature2013 points out -and as the date of its first appearance, in Torres Caicedo's poem, ratifies-, "Latin America" is a marker that belongs to The Export Age[^9] (xviii). 

If the idea and concept of "Latin America" appeared as a Creole reaction to the advance of the neocolonial and imperialist projects that accompanied the Second Industrial Revolution, Colombianism in some cases anticipated, and in others impeded and shook, the advance of those projects. The "capital fictions" Beckman analyzes are _responses_ to global economic modernization and liberalization [@beckmanCapitalFictionsLiterature2013, x]. The fictions of the Independence revolution were _part of the design_ of such globalization[^5]. My approach identifies with the principle proposed by Beckman, of repositioning the cultural production of the region, and conceiving it not in the rearguard but in the vanguard of the history of global capitalism. What I propose is to incorporate in the analysis the period in which the region assumed in a more evident way that avant-garde role, beyond its overdetermination as a region of nature-exporting societies[^10], and the long (post/de)colonial tradition of peripheral Occidentalism.


[^1]: I call real Colombia the zone of Colombian fiction that becomes institutionally constituted: what is conventionally called Gran Colombia. I differentiate it from the potential Colombia. Namely, the area (much larger) of Colombian fiction that, despite aspiring to become a first-order reality, remains in the theoretical or speculative sphere.

[^2]: Contextualization of the phrase "imitate orijinality, since they try to imitate everything", from the evidence of intertext and unattributed Rodriguesian quotation with the founding fathers found by Ronald Briggs, and others found in my research.

[^4]: Specification of to what extent and at what times Brazil became part of the Columbian project, usually restricted to Hispanic America.

[^5]: The Panama Canal, the international law principle of uti posidetis, the visual experimentation with typography, the abolition of slavery, the supranational confederation and multiculturalism are some of the modern projects and practices in which Colombianism was a pioneer in the world.

[^6]: In this note I summarize the most definitive elements among textual evidence collected by Bosh to support this point. 

[^7]: Marx and Engels. Communist Manifesto.

[^2]: As we will examine later, this concept, fundamental for our research, comes from Fernando Coronil.

[^10]: 