---
title: 1. Introduction
---
# Introduction
_The Bolivar papers: race and the printing press in the First wave of Decolonization_ is a critical study of Colombian supranational imagination, through some of its more relevant printed objects. I study how certain proclamations, newspapers and libels printed in London, Aruba, Jacmel (Haiti), Coro, Margarita, Caracas and Angostura (Venezuela), Amelia Island (United States), Arequipa (Peru), Lima (Peru) and Valparaíso (Chile), between 1806 and 1842, shaped a transnational imagined community that preceded the idea and concept of Latin America. I am particularly interested in discussing how these printed projects postulated the insertion of the new republics into the nascent global political economy, putting in crisis some of the fundamental premises of European and North American humanism. And in a broader sense, I am interested in thinking about how during the Andean-Caribbean decolonization war a set of transnational fictions prefigure and at the same time put in crisis some identity assumptions of Latin Americanist nationalisms that emerged since the mid-nineteenth century.

In my research I work with pieces printed during the Andean-Caribbean decolonization process by some of its protagonists. I aim at the analysis of the great tensions that run through Colombianism, starting from a consideration of the way in which printing and racism worked together in the formation of colonial and neocolonial modernity, and the way in which Colombianism posed ruptures and continuities with respect to it. I propose that attention to the material aspects and singular textuality of some of the printed milestones of Colombianism allows us to identify substantial differences between what they posited and how they were reinterpreted by the Latin American cultural fictions that came after the Colombian supranationalism. I postulate that this analysis has been neglected by the contemporary discussion on Latin American decolonial thought, which tends to subsume the Colombian legacy into the interpretative matrix that followed its dissolution. 

Each chapter of my dissertation will concentrate on a set of printed pieces, which I will organize according to the periods in which the different formulations of the supranational project were articulated. In the first chapter I study some pieces edited or printed by Francisco de Miranda that anticipated the foundation of the First Venezuelan Republic -the _Proclama a los habitantes del nuevo continente_ (1806) and issues I and IV of the newspaper _El Colombiano_ (1810)- , and the _Manifiesto al mundo de la Confederación de Venezuela_ (1811), which was printed when the republic had already been established. In the second chapter I focus on pieces printed during the campaigns and governments of Simon Bolivar in the Second and Third Republics, which have to do directly with the problem of race and slavery: the _Decreto de guerra a muerte_ (1813), the _Manifesto de Carúpano_ (1814), the proclamation _A los habitantes de Río Caribe, Carúpano y Cariaco_ (1816), and numbers 1 and 57 of the _Correo del Orinoco_ (1820). In the third chapter I concentrate on some of the documents printed by the civic-military group that in the name of Colombia -and with participants from Mexico, Argentina, England, Venezuela and the United States- occupied Amelia Island under Spanish possession and proclaimed the Republic of the Floridas. In the fourth chapter I work with two texts belonging to the crises that followed the founding of Colombia: the presentation of the magazine _Repertorio Americano_, published by Andrés Bello and Juan García del Río in 1826 in London, and the annex to the _Defensa de Bolívar_, "Nota sobre el Proyecto de Educación Popular", published by Simón Rodríguez in 1830 in Arequipa. Finally, in the fifth chapter I study the last published part of the editorial project _Sociedades americanas en 1828_, printed after Lima in 1842, after the dissolution of Colombia and in the awakening of the Export Age.

The focus on each of this texts or sets of printed texts I will detail in the last section, where I provide a brief summary of my chapters, with their primary sources, main arguments and possible ramifications. First I provide, in the following sections, a brief historical context, a  definition of the articulation I propose between racism and print culture, and a bibliographical review regarding the main conceptual tools that run through my study, such as Latin Americanism, transnational fictions and decolonization.  With this project I hope to contribute to Latin American studies, discussing an understudied area of the genealogy of Latin Americanism.  For, as we shall see in the bibliographical review, the tradition of Colombianism has been, with few exceptions, metonymically assimilated by the critique of Latin Americanist nationalism that supplanted it. In the perspective I propose, Colombianism can be read as a paradoxically concealed zone -by its apparent visibility- of Latin American thought, in which the way of conceiving global modernity has many more resources than its substitute, to dialogue with the contemporary post-hegemonic paradigm.