# [@williamsSubalternistTurnLatin2016]

## Sobre los límites y la naturaleza imperial de los subalternismos 

> The question, then, is how to establish a way of thinking that is capable of preparing the way for an alternative _telos_, or for a _turn_ that is not always already acquiescent before the history of the onto-theological (i.e. the imperial) itself.

¿y cuáles van a ser los seres de luz que van a preparar ese camino?


> Despite ending the essay with the warning that democratization under global conditions might no longer hinge on the broadening of modern subject-based rights, citizenship, and representation (that is, it might no longer depend on the deepening of the relation between cultural identity and the political), Quijano concludes with a return to a previous avatar of post-Independence thought that is grounded essentially in creole notions of citizenship, identity, difference and representation.

> Quijano’s recourse to a Latin American ‘We’—a ‘People’ yet to be delivered up from historical alienation and yet to be born unto “our” true, and truly independent, metaphysical structure—is obviously an echo of José Martí’s famous _Nuestroamericanismo_: “A lo que es, allí donde se gobierna, hay que atender para gobernar bien; y el buen gobierno en América no es el que sabe cómo se gobierna el alemán o el francés, sino el que sabe con qué elementos está hecho su país” (27-8). But that is not all we can hear, for we can also hear echoes of Andrés Bello’s “Autonomía cultural de América” of 1848, as Quijano restages Bello’s admonition to the youth of Chile to aspire to the independence of thought by avoiding excessive servility to the science of civilized Europe. We could even go further back, however, to Simón Bolívar in 1819: “¿No dice el _Espíritu de las leyes_ que éstas deben ser propias para el pueblo que las hace?, ¿que es una gran casualidad que las de una nación puedan convertir a otra?, ¿que las leyes deben ser relativas a lo físico del país, al clima, a la calidad del terreno, a su situación, a su extension, al género de vida de los pueblos? . . . ¡He aquí el código que debíamos consultar y no el de Washington!” (quoted in Gómez-Martínez, 2). The end of Quijano’s essay, which has become one of the principle gateways into the thought of the so-called “decolonial option”, turns toward a centuries old tradition of creole Latin American thought that is grounded in _lo nuestro_, that can only be measured from within the imperial _nomos_ of _criollismo_, and that remains subject at all times to its Christian anthropological ontology.


> In the wake of the subalternist turn, the genealogies of the Latin American _criollista_ tradition restage _cultural identity_ as a form of salvation from the imperial _nomos_ and from the time of unfettered capital. Given the continuity of its essentially _criollista_ ground, there can be no actual “turn”, detour or deviance—no turning our backs on post-Independence regimes of representation—from within the decolonial variant of the subalternist turn. The decolonial option as a thought of the law of the Subject and of the Subject alone, and therefore as Latin-Romanic thought grafted onto European Enlightenment thought in its most rudimentary form, is more a hindrance to decolonization than a help, for until there is a decolonization of the law of the Subject (that is, of identity thinking) there can be no decolonization at all. Until then the entire history of Western phallo-logocentrism (that is, the legacies of identity and difference; of the paternal, the familial, the fraternal, the Law, the Christian community, the hearth, the nation, the homo-philial, _lo nuestro_ etc.) remains firmly in place in, and thanks to, the decolonial option, despite its accusations of Eurocentrism and its claims of a political and cultural alternative to the reigning nomos. As Abraham Acosta puts it in a reading strategy that is nevertheless distinct from the one presented in these pages, decolonial thought (as exemplified in the over 600-page tome, _Coloniality at Large_, edited by Mabel Moraña, Enrique Dussel and Carlos Jáuregui) “ultimately provides an unreliable mapping of the stakes and terms of postcolonial critique and its relationship to Latin America” (39).[i](#sdendnote1sym)



> By definition, the subaltern cannot be a subject of history understood in the sense suggested by Beverley. That is, she can never be an autonomous plenitude. As Spivak put it, “the subaltern is necessarily the absolute limit of the place where history is narrativized into logic” (16) (a formulation that was explored extensively in my 2002 book, _The Other Side of the Popular_, which I will return to below)


## Sobre el paradigma post-hegemónico contemporáneo
> Now it is increasingly clear that we are witnessing the violent breakdown of the restraining force of the imperial _nomos_ that originated in the sixteenth century, that consolidated the bourgeois revolutions internal to the European imperial state system, that provided a grammar of unification for the emergence and extension of the modern nation-state, reaching its apotheosis at the beginning of the twentieth century. Now it is increasingly clear that the definitive dissolution of the planetary nomos was held at bay by two imperial world wars (which perhaps could be considered to be extended European civil wars), Keynesian welfare economics, and the Cold War restraining division of the planet into first, second, and third worlds, which prolonged the history of containment between state and non-state capitalisms.
> 
> The era of the revolutions of the national bourgeoisies had come to a definitive close by the mid-1970s. This marks the advent of the global financial revolution, which is also the signal crisis of US military-Keynesian hegemony.[ii](#sdendnote1sym) Capital therefore had to overcome its legislative and territorial constraints in order to launch a new era of profitability. As a result the relation between capital, state, and working class has been radically de-sutured by the advent of the new global division of labor. With the ongoing dissolution of the bourgeois imperial _katechon_, of national capitals sutured to the discourses of economic and societal development, underdevelopment and dependency; of clearly defined centers and peripheries, and therefore of insides and outsides, the wars that used to appear as the performance of territorialized sovereign legitimacy now emerge as conflicts over access to extractable and exploitable resources and labor on a planetary scale.
> 
> The modern nomos has entered into a state of collapse and we are living times of total economic mobilization and spatial de-structuration characterized by the ultra-violence of narco-accumulation and the rampant extraction of resources not only in Latin America—in which the so-called leftist governments of the _marea rosada_ have been key players too, of course—but in any space virtually anywhere on the planet deemed available for the extraction of value. This is the time of spatial and political de-containment, and posthegemony is the sign and diagnosis of its peculiar, post-developmentalist epochality. Within this context, the very terms of debate on the possible pathway toward a conceptual and practical turn, detour, deviation, or divergence have had to shift.

Aquí queda muy en evidencia la perspectiva etnocéntrica de la epocalidad. Habría que señalar, por un lado, que este discurso anti-extractivista es idealismo puro, y por otro, que dicho nomos nunca existió en la América no-blanca. Lo que ponen en evidencia las dos cartas de Jamaica es que entre 1815 y 1818 ese paradigma se movió, de una tentativa de nacionalismo etnocéntrico como en el que está atrapado Quijano, a uno mucho más próximo al plurinacionalismo económicamente solvente de la revolución boliviana. También cabe aquí observar una dinámica como la de la República de las Floridas, en la que se expresan muchos de los rasgos que Williams atribuye a la epocalidad contemporánea.



> we confront the closure of metaphysics hand in hand with the advent of absolute technological en-framing (_techne_) on a planetary scale. Reiner Schürmann offers the fundamental diagnosis in _Broken Hegemonies_ that in the current epoch—that of the closure of metaphysics, which is _the closure of epochality itself_—we are witnessing the gradual and unforgiving breakdown of any _arche_ previously capable of grounding thought and action

Lo que uno contrapondría es que en el pensamiento bolivariano lo que quedaba más en evidencia es que no había _arche_ capaz de ground thought and action salvo el de-contaiment de la expansión anti-imperialista. Es especialmente relevante observar cómo esta noción no pertenece al plan de la independencia –donde son mucho más claras las fuentes imperiales del nosotros blanco– sino a los acontecimientos históricos que le dan forma. Y aquí valdría la pena citar a Quijano, es decir usar sus palabras para la crítica a las mitologías de las modernidades autogeneradas.

> In this sense, the time of the closure of metaphysics is _an-archic_ (in which case, neoliberalism is merely a symptom of, and the attempt to further conceal, a far deeper conceptual-existential conundrum). The closure of metaphysics does not indicate a transition to other forms—for here there is no Hegelian _Aufhebung_ available—unless the sovereign decisionism of so-called “real politics” intervenes to simplify matters for us.

Esto sería útil para pensar lo del anti-fetichismo en Rodríguez, pero quizá también lo de su peculiar _modernismo_, en diálogo con el libro sobre Lezama Lima que leí con Pedro.




> Obviously the emergence of the nation-state as the principle foundation of the post-1648 Westphalian world order, or the ascension of individual consciousness as the _arche_ of the bourgeois Enlightenment subject in post-Renaissance philosophy and politics, are refortifications of an originary concept—the One, the Subject, consciousness etc—that has been waning and reinstating itself so forcefully for millennia. Needless to say, such refortifications and iterations have been fundamental for the historic territorialization of capital and the modern nation-state. Communitarianism, the commons, neo-communism, de-colonial thought and the theories of the multitude are all theories of a subjectivist will to power grounded not in the closure of metaphysics but in the decisionist/subjectivist _closure of the closure of metaphysics_ extended in the name of the Aristotelian _pros hen_. All these theoretical political formulations are themselves deeply invested in the ontological politics inherent in Hegel’s Romanic imagination.

Lo que ofrecen los materiales del colombismo es precisamente una experiencia singular del Sujeto y de lo Uno. Es una experiencia en la que se encuentra con unos límites post o anti-nómicos constitutivos, estructurales, que pueden emparentarse con la experiencia de lo _marrano_. Es decir, es una experiencia de lo subjetivo que se postula a partir de su inseguridad ontológica y su incertidumbre epistemológica, y que tiene su _point de capiton_ en el movimiento de la masa. Quizá esto es todavía muy parecido a la noción de multitud. Pero lo que nos interesa no es tanto lo que planificó ser ni en lo que se convirtió en el umbral de lo político sino cómo puede leerse o cómo se expresa hoy lo que entonces podría haber sido. Aunque quizá frente a este particular mejor quedarse únicamente con el hecho de que el proyecto supranacional colombista nunca funcionó de acuerdo a lo que se planteó a partir del Sujeto y el Uno, que lo que nos interesa de él es cómo destruyó esos presupuestos, y que su reconstitución identitaria posterior es un proyecto no solo ajeno sino opuesto a él. Mi crítica es que tanto como el exteriorismo esencialista identitario de los decoloniales como el exteriorismo anti-decisionista de los infrapolíticos no dialogan con el colombismo sino con la versión cultual de él.


> To my mind, and here we come full circle, infrapolitical posthegemonic democracy is epochal diagnosis and destruction grounded in the clearing away of the subordination of freedom to the ontology of subjectivity. It is the clearing away of the _subjectum_ of representation not in order to get rid of representation, but in order to redefine the relation of representation itself to the political. This is still the work of the _perhaps_ (Moreiras refers to it as democratic _marranismo_ \[2016\]) that takes us simultaneously back to the subalternist turn of the 1990s and forward toward the infrapolitical excess or difference from the political that is the endless, a-principial, non-subjectivist repertoire through which posthegemonic democracy can be discussed and traversed in both thought and practice, in the epoch of the closure of epochality that traverses everything we do and think today. Such a turn, it might be said, is disconnected from the decisionism of “real politics”? So be it. Its conceptual distance is fundamental to the possibility of a clearing, and turn, worthy of the name.

Es igual un decisionismo pasivo. Es decir, sigue asumiendo que hay un rol visionario y/o en capacidad de guiar, de los intelectuales, de prescribir soluciones y definir los “giros”

## Su resumen de la opción decolonial

> In the wake of the subalternist turn of the 1990s the so-called “decolonial option”, coordinated and extended around the figure and writings of Walter Mignolo and others, has installed itself as _the_ ubiquitous mode of postcolonial Latin Americanist thought in recent decades. On the cultural and historical levels this paradigm restages the basic logics of three foundational identitarian traditions from Latin America. The traditions in question are: (1) José Martí-inspired _Nuestroamericanismo_; (2) the identitarian legacies of Andean _indigenismo_, which, historically speaking, is a conceptual extension of the aforementioned creole _nuestroamericanismo_ but in inverted form; (3) the Philosophy of Liberation that emerged from within the heterogeneous political forces of Argentine Peronism in the early 1970s.



> Enrique Dussel becomes the sole philosopher of liberation and “decoloniality”, though it must also be pointed out that in this fully decisionist reconversion Dusserl’s work on Marxism is largely ignored (perhaps because Marx was not Latin American)

No entiendo bien esta ironía, pero en todo caso lo que más nos interesa de Dussel es cómo subrayó e hizo legible al Marx desconocido



> The second gesture of the “decolonial option” is to articulate the three aforementioned creole-Christian identitarian traditions from Latin America with U.S. university-style identity politics, or U.S. academic ‘liberalism’, which is built exclusively on discourses of identitarian exclusion and inclusion in the name of diversity. The third gesture is to then scaffold all of the above onto the legacy of dependency theory and Immanuel Wallerstein’s world-systems analysis, even though under current conditions it is clear that the division of the world into core countries, semi-peripheral countries and peripheral countries has already succumbed to a spatial complexity for which world-systems analysis can no longer account.



> Given its clearly Christian and creole identitarian underpinnings, it appears at first glance that decolonial thought might be little more than an ontotheological response to the contemporary crisis of ontotheology.

Me sirve mucho la insistencia en los adjetivos de criollo y cristiano, y lo que tiene de especialmente marrana la condición de cristiano criollo.






## notas
[i](#sdendnote1anc)Also see the following: “No habrá descolonización efectiva de América Latina, ni del conocimiento latinoamericanista, esto es, no habrá ninguna crítica genuinamente democrática de la razón imperial, sobre la base de los varios supuestos y tan celebrados descubrimientos, revelaciones, y procedimientos que ofrece el decolonialismo. La opción decolonial, para hablar claro, no es una crítica democrática de la razón imperial, ni pretende serlo. Lo malo es que, entonces, se convierte en una crítica imperial de la razón imperial, o, lo que es lo mismo, una crítica colonial de la razón colonial” (Moreiras, _Marranismo_, 2016, 92-3).

[ii](#sdendnote1anc)

The 1950s and 1960s witnessed “a major intensification of competitive pressures on each and every governmental and business organization of the capitalist world-economy and in a consequent massive withdrawal of money capital from trade and production. The switch occurred in the critical years 1968-73. It was during these years that deposits in the so-called Eurodollar or Eurocurrency market experienced a sudden upward jump followed by twenty years of explosive growth. And it was during these same six years that the system of fixed parities between the main national currencies and the US dollar and between the US dollar and gold, which had been in force throughout the phase of material expansion, was abandoned in favor of the system of flexible or floating exchange rates—a system which some regard not as a system at all, but as the form taken by the crisis of the pre-existing system” (Arrighi, 307-8). The crisis of the US regime traversed three distinct and closely related areas: “Militarily, the US army got into ever more serious troubles in Vietnam; financially, the US Federal Reserve found it difficult and then impossible to preserve the mode of production and regulation of world money established at Bretton Woods; and ideologically, the US government’s anti-communist crusade began losing legitimacy both at home and abroad” (Arrighi, 309).

