#misreadingBolivar

# Simon, Joshua. _The Ideology of Creole Revolution : Imperialism and Independence in American and Latin American Political Thought_. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, 2017.

> The celebrated Mexican statesman José Vasconcelos , in his 1934  
> Bolivarismo y Monroísmo: Temas Iberoamericanos ( Santiago : Biblioteca  
> América ), described Alamán’s “Spanish Americanism” thus: “it is little  
> known that the fi rst attempt to deal a blow to the Monroe Doctrine was  
> by the Mexican, Lucas Alamán ... Alamán believed in the race \[ la raza \],  
> believed in the language, believed in the religious community. In sum,  
> Alamán gave Bolivarianism the content that it lacked.... With Alamán a  
> Spanish Americanism in clear and defi ned opposition to \[Monroeism\] is  
> born.”

> 239


Es decir, que uno de los primeros padres del latinoamericanismo nacionalista pudo haber sido Lucas Alamán



# Vieira, Marco. “The decolonial subject and the problem of non-Western authenticity”. _Postcolonial Studies

> Indeed, in following Lacan’s theory of the subject, the psychological healing  
> of the colonial wound would require rescuing pre-colonial symbolic signifiers that are  
> needed to restructure a stable, albeit imagined, sense of **postcolonial ontological security**. Yet in fact these processes of postcolonial self-identification are necessary fantasies that  
> work to psychologically ameliorate the anxiety generated by the subject’s permanent  
> desire to fill up with meaning their **existential lack, generated by their stigmatised position**  
> **in the system of Western (post-)coloniality**. For Lacan the fulfilment of a whole and auth-  
> entic ‘self’ is always a desired, albeit impossible, project. 49

158


Lo interesante de pensar esto en el caso del colombismo es que ese proceso de auto-identificación post-colonial se produce de un modo muy distinto en el latinoamericanismo moernista, por no decir que solo existe en él. El existential lack y esa posición estigmatizada en el sistema (post)colonial solo postuló un "whole and authentic 'self'" with pre-colonial symbolic signifiers cuando se consideró sin cortapisas un proyecto constitutivo, fundacional del hemisferio. Y en esta postulación, lo no-blanco no estuvo postulado como un marcador de inferioridad o victimización, sino de combatividad y grandeza. La tesis podría apuntar a que el latinoamericanismo convierte los mecanismos de seguridad ontológica en inseguridad.